---
release-date: 2025-08-12
vote-date: 2025-08-01
authors:
  - Helium Core Developers
status: Proposed
---

# Helium Release Proposal August 2025

## Summary

This document defines the release that will be deployed on or before August 12th, 2025. As features are discussed in the community and developed by Helium Core Developers, this release document will be updated with context and explicit details on implementation.

Around the vote date, which is expected to kick off around August 1st, 2025, this release will be finalized and presented to the community for approval. Note that all features that are not code complete will be moved to a future release or removed prior to vote.

---

## Roadmap Features

1. Removal of Unstarted Boosted Hexes from the Mobile Network
2. Add Serial Number for Helium Mobile WiFi hotspots on-chain
---

### (1) Removal of Unstarted Boosted Hexes from the Mobile Network

#### Motivation  

This proposal aims to clean up the Mobile network by removing all unstarted boosted hexes. Since boosted hexes have largely not met expectations, this HRP removes unstarted hexes while still supporting deployers who depend on active boosted rewards to help fund their deployments.

As of July 2, 2025, the following are active boosted hexes with their expiration dates: 

| country | boost | count | expiration  |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Mexico | 10 | 22740 | 2025-12-26 00:00:00+00 |
| Mexico | 100 | 1 | 2025-07-11 01:00:00+00 |
| United States | 5 | 11950 | 2026-01-14 00:00:00+00 |
| United States | 10 | 77 | 2025-12-20 00:00:00+00 |
| United States | 30 | 15 | 2025-12-10 00:00:00+00 |
| United States | 100 | 31 | 2025-12-10 00:00:00+00 |
| **Total Active Hexes** |  | **34814** |  |

The number of non-activated boosted hexes:

| country | boost | count |
| :---: | :---: | :---: |
| United States | 100 | 135 |
| United States | 50 | 10 |
| United States | 30 | 139 |
| United States | 10 | 2369 |
| United States | 5 | 293113 |
| Mexico | 10 | 11240 |
| **Total Unstarted Hexes** |  | **307006** |

The boosted rewards constitute about 18% of the PoC pool today.

#### Implementation

* A snapshot of all boosted hexes and their activation status will be taken on July 1, 2025.   
* All boosted hexes identified in the snapshot will be removed from the chain as soon as this HRP is activated and their Solana account rent reclaimed.  
* No action is required for started hexes; they will continue to age out naturally.  

#### Alternatives Considered

* Terminate all boosted hexes regardless of status. This approach was considered too heavy-handed for legitimate deployers that are in boosted hexes and rely on the boosted rewards to fund deployments.

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

* By avoiding additional boosts, the network will safeguard the PoC reward budget for useful deployments.
* This HRP affects deployers that were planning to deploy in boosted hexes - There are not many deployers gaming activating boosted hexes after the requirements for user-observed user counts were raised. For deployers that are about to deploy in boosted hexes, the grace period gives them time to activate the boosted hexes. 
* Deployers in Mexico could get affected, but there are no accessible inactive boosted hexes and all the boosted areas are carrier offload tagged, which means they will receive PoC rewards at the 1.0 multiple when deployed in those areas.


---

### (2) Add Serial Number for Helium Mobile WiFi hotspots on-chain

#### Motivation

Right now, Helium Mobile Hotspot serial number information is not stored on-chain. This creates issues keeping two disjoint system in sync, and building systems that work solely off of on-chain data.

#### Implementation

The serial number will be added as a string to the deployment info struct for WiFi Hotspots.

#### Alternatives Considered

The only other alternative is what is already done.

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

Better DevEx for people integrating with Helium's Solana systems

#### Drawbacks

The SOL rent cost per Hotspot will increase marginally.

#### PRs List (from non-Helium Core Devs)
