---
release-date: 2025-11-07
vote-date: 2025-10-30
authors:
  - Helium Core Developers
status: Proposed
---

# Helium Release Proposal November 2025

## Summary

This document defines the release that will be deployed on or after November 7th, 2025. As features are discussed in the community and developed by Helium Core Developers, this release document will be updated with context and explicit details on implementation.

Around the vote date, which is expected to kick off around October 30th 2025, this release will be finalized and presented to the community for approval. Note that all features that are not code complete will be moved to a future release or removed prior to vote.

---

## Roadmap Features

1. Implementation of HIP 148 - Reallocate Mobile Mapping Rewards
2. Increase Distance to Asserted Allowance for Outdoor Hotspots

---

### (1) Implementation of HIP 148 - Reallocate Mobile Mapping Rewards

#### Motivation

As part of optimizing allocation of HNT emissions, [HIP-148](https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0148-reallocate-mobile-mapping-rewards.md) proposed removing mapping rewards for subscribers and reallocating those rewards to the Data Rewards and Service Provider Rewards Pools. Additionally, the HIP proposed to repeal several prior HIPs that are no longer necessary given the removal of mapping rewards, and allocate Oracle Operator rewards to the Service Provider Rewards Pool. This HIP was approved by the community and this release implements the changes, as defined in HIP-148.

#### Implementation

This is not a complex change since the current system already supports changing allocation to various rewards pools.

#### Alternatives Considered

Refer to the HIP for alternatives

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

Refer to the HIP for impact

#### Drawbacks

Refer to the HIP for drawbacks

---

### (2) Increase Distance to Asserted Allowance for Outdoor Hotspots

#### Motivation

In [HRP-20250909](https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/HRP-20250909.md), the core developers proposed increasing the distance to asserted allowance for both indoor and outdoor Hotspots to prepare for dynamic carrier offload selection based on Location Trust Score. This change had a positive impact on deployers since Skyhook drift impacted deployers less while allowing the dynamic offload enablement after carrier selection to be implemented without affecting correctly deployed Hotspots.

As part of Carrier Offload selection some outdoor Hotspots can be considered for indoor installation in combination with user demand sampling. Indoor installations often result in loss of accurate GPS signal. Outdoor Hotspots remediate this lack of accurate GPS information by falling back to Skyhook for a location estimate. To allow for this fallback while also enabling dynamic Carrier Offload Selection based on the Location Trust Score, the core developers will be adjusting the distances where the Trust Score drops to 0.25 and 0, to be more lenient for outdoor hotspots.

Current outdoor Hotspot location trust score table:

| Current Distance | New Distance | Score |
| ---------------- | ------------ | ----- |
| 0 - 100          | 0 - 300      | 1.0   |
| 101 - 150        | 301 - 400    | 0.25  |
| 151 -            | 401 -        | 0     |

Note that this matches the same distance allowances as indoor Hotspots as defined in [HRP-20250909](https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/HRP-20250909.md):

| Distance  | Score |
| --------- | ----- |
| 0 - 300   | 1.0   |
| 301 - 400 | 0.25  |
| 401 -     | 0     |

#### Implementation

This is a simple multiplier adjustment to the Mobile Oracles

#### Alternatives Considered

The indicated distances were arrived at to include 95% of all distances to asserted values for Hotspots where the Location Trust Score was not currently 1.0 based on Skyhook location estimates. The remaining 5% of Hotspots had distances that far exceeded the maximum value and would be considered mis-asserted Hotspots.

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

This should have a positive impact on deployers since Skyhook drift will impact deployers less while allowing the dynamic offload enablement after carrier selection to be implemented without affecting correctly deployed Hotspots. This change will also allow some outdoor Hotspots to be considered for indoor venues without having their carrier offload dynamically disabled due to location trust score adjustments.

#### Drawbacks

The increased allowance does make for less accuracy on verifying a Hotspot location based on the inferred location, but carrier selection currently looks at the "general" location correctness of a Hotspot instead of a more precise location.

---
