---
release-date: 2025-05-13
vote-date: 2025-04-30
authors:
  - Helium Core Developers
status: Proposed
---

# Helium Release Proposal May 2025

## Summary

This document defines the release that will be deployed on or before May 13th, 2025. As features are discussed in the community and developed by Helium Core Developers, this release document will be updated with context and explicit details on implementation.

Around the vote date, that's expected to kick off at April 30th, 2025, this release will be finalized and presented to the community for approval. Note that all features that are not code complete will be moved to a future release or removed prior to vote.

---

## Roadmap Features

1. IoT Metrics Service

---

### (1) IoT Metrics Service

Analyze traffic on the Helium IoT Network with the goal of being to more closely approximate the number of active devices transferring data through the network.

#### Motivation

As a permissionless and encrypted protocol, the IoT Network's implementation of LoRaWAN does not have a native method to count the number of devices that are active on the network. While the counting individual messages (via packet reports) has been available in the post-L1 implementation of the IoT Network, understanding unique devices has remained elusive.

In an effort to unify messaging between the IoT and Mobile networks, sourcing a more accurate count of daily active devices will allow the IoT network to stand side-by-side with the Mobile network in stats reflecting the impact of the Helium Network globally.

#### Implementation

Helium Packet Router (HPR) is a set of globally distributed servers tasked with handling this traffic. It essentially acts as a bridge between Hotspots and the LoRaWAN Network Servers (LNS) where those devices are managed.

The service ...


#### Alternatives Considered

* It is somewhat possible to take a guess at the number of active devices by applying an average count of messages sent per device and dividing that among the total number of messaged sent in a day, however the frequency of transmission from LoRaWAN devices vary wildly – ranging from once a day to to several times per minute. Without a picture of the types of devices onboarded, estimating the transmission rate is wildly inaccurate.
* Make no change.

#### Impact

* The core team does not expect any impact to performance of HPR or message transfer on the network.
* Dashboards will be able to begin reporting device counts active on the network.

#### Drawbacks

* None


---

