---
release-date: 2025-12-03
vote-date: 2025-11-26
authors:
  - Helium Core Developers
status: Proposed
---

# Helium Release Proposal December 2025

## Summary

This document defines the release that will be deployed on or before December 3rd, 2025. As features are discussed in the community and developed by Helium Core Developers, this release document will be updated with context and explicit details on implementation.

Around the vote date, which is expected to kick off around November 26th 2025, this release will be finalized and presented to the community for approval. Note that all features that are not code complete will be moved to a future release or removed prior to vote.

---

## Roadmap Features

1. Remove SOL rent subsidy for Hotspot reward claims
2. Reclaim SOL rent from Subscriber NFT on-chain data

---

### (1) Remove rent subsidy for HNT `RecipientV0` structs

#### Motivation

As part of the migration from MOBILE / IOT to HNT, all Hotspots earning rewards needed new on-chain struct (`RecipientV0`) to track their claimable rewards. These Hotspots retain MOBILE / IOT `RecipientV0`s, but those are not able to be used for HNT as they are tracking unclaimed subnetwork token rewards.

The protocol (specifically Nova Labs) has been paying the SOL rent for all new HNT `RecipientV0`s, as it was decided that Hotspot deployers had already paid once and should not have to pay again. It has now been nearly a year since the change, and all deployers have had ample opportunity to claim rewards and in so doing, claim this rent subsidy. As such, this subsidy is more often paying for new Hotspots than it is for legacy MOBILE/IOT earners.

As of this HRP, core developers will remove the subsidy. New Hotspots can pay for their recipient structs using the small amount of SOL sent by the maker to fresh wallets onboarding a Hotspot.

#### Implementation

An environment variable on the oracle server controls whether the server's keypair will pay for new `RecipientV0` structs. This will be set to false.

#### Alternatives Considered

- Continue subsidizing rent: Given the history of this protocol change, we do not believe this is an obligation that should continue given the cost (0.00242208 SOL) the prolonged grace period, and the fact that makers are already seeding fresh wallets on onboards.

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

- Makers will have a higher rent burden (this is already covered in the default 0.02 SOL the onboarding server has makers send to fresh wallets).
- IOT deployers under makers with insufficient SOL will need to pay rent again for `RecipientV0` structs, as it was a year ago.

#### Drawbacks

- May decrease IOT deployments as there is a one-time cost of ~$0.40 in rent to claim rewards.

---

### (2) Reclaim rent SOL from Subscribers

#### Motivation

Every Mobile subscriber was issued a Helium cNFT with an attached `KeyToAssetV0` and `RecipientV0` struct on-chain. This allowed subscribers to claim mapping rewards. Now that subscribers are no longer eligible for mapping rewards, that state on-chain will sit forever unused. To put that SOL to use, the protocol will add temporary endpoints that allow a protocol controlled keypair to close on-chain structs associated with mapping. The carrier was the one paying for these structs, and so the rent will be returned to the carrier (Helium Mobile).

Note that the cNFTs will still exist, they just will not have the infrastructure to claim rewards. As part of this change, any final unclaimed rewards will be claimed and sent to the wallet holding the NFT.

#### Implementation

Temporary contract endpoints will be inserted into helium-entity-manager, rewards-oracle, and lazy-distributor to close the relevant on-chain structs. Prior to executing these close instructions, it will be required that all rewards are claimed. These endpoints will require a signature from the protocol team. These endpoints will be removed after the operation is complete.

While the team would like to have more permanent permissioned endpoints for removing these structs, the on-chain implementation has not tracked the issuer of these structs, who paid the rent for them, nor who should have the permission to close them. As such, any permanent endpoint would have to give blanket permission to close all structs to the current issuing authorities. This was deemed by the protocol team to be too dangerous. This is an infrequent problem, so it is better addressed by temporary endpoints if/when they are needed.

Subscriber data from Helium Mobile will be imported directly into dune, so dune dashboards can stop using NFT onboards as a proxy.

#### Alternatives Considered

- Leave the structs on-chain. Given this is in the thousands of SOL, it makes sense to reclaim that rent.

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

- Any mappers who have not yet claimed their rewards will have their rewards claimed + land in their wallet.
- Any dashboards counting subscriber NFTs issuance may be affected, though most look at onboarding transactions and not the on-chain structs. Going forward we will port subscriber data from Helium Mobile into Dune.

#### Drawbacks

- Use of developer time, but the reclaimed SOL is worth that effort.
