---
release-date: 2025-10-10
vote-date: 2025-10-02
authors:
  - Helium Core Developers
status: Proposed
---

# Helium Release Proposal October 2025

## Summary

This document defines the release that will be deployed on or before October 10th, 2025. As features are discussed in the community and developed by Helium Core Developers, this release document will be updated with context and explicit details on implementation.

Around the vote date, which is expected to kick off around September 26th 2025, this release will be finalized and presented to the community for approval. Note that all features that are not code complete will be moved to a future release or removed prior to vote.

---

## Roadmap Features

1. CDR based Discovery Mapping for points based subscribers

---

### (1) CDR based Discovery Mapping for points based subscribers

#### Motivation

Discovery Mapping for both Points and Crypto based Helium Mobile (HM) subscribers is currently based on phone based background processes to share location anonymously. This data has been used to visualize demand and help guide network expansion. However, this approach has many issues ranging from extensive location gaming, phone rooting detection, and background activity, increased battery usage, memory growth, and location access permissions problems.

This HRP introduces a new method for Discovery Mapping that leverages Call Detail Records (CDRs) from the cellular network. This approach will provide a less accurate, tower-based, location for users but does not require any custom, long running software to be installed on user devices. Just like in previous mapping related changes, this change will only be implemented for points-based subscribers, as they are less incentivized to attempt to game location data or fix issues with location sharing. Crypto based subscribers will continue to use the existing phone based location sharing method.

There is a separate HIP that will be proposed to find alternate uses for Discovery Mapping rewards altogether. This HRP update documents the intermediary change to move subscribers away from the existing discovery mapping based approach while retaining a useful set of subscriber validation mechanisms.

#### Implementation

The Discovery Mapping and Verification backends already know how to distinguish Crypto from Points based subscribers. The existing phone based location sharing will be disabled for Points based subscribers in the application, and a CDR based reward share allocation system will be implemented and deployed.

#### Alternatives Considered

- Continue with existing phone based location sharing for all subscribers. This approach has a number of issues as described in the motivation section and is not a long term solution.
- Implement CDR based location sharing for all subscribers. This approach would be more complex, and would need to correlate crypto rewards with a points based system which would require incompatible changes to the existing Crypto subscriber reward system.

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

- Points based subscribers will no longer need to handle location sharing issues in their app to keep their accounts active. The system would change to a much simpler "use it or lose it" model based on CDRs.
- Crypto based subscribers will be unaffected by this change and will continue to use the existing phone based location sharing method. Given that the number of points based subscribers with valid CDR data will substantially increase, we expect to see a corresponding decrease in Discovery Mapping rewards for Crypto based subscribers.

#### Drawbacks

- This approach may lead to less accurate location data for Points based subscribers, as it relies on CDRs rather than real-time phone-based location sharing.
- The change will require updates to existing apps and services that rely on the current location sharing method. These updates are already in progress.
- The Crypto subscriber experience will remain unchanged but will lead to subpar experiences as the mapping subsystem development is scaled back.

---
