---
release-date: 2025-09-09
vote-date: 2025-09-01
authors:
  - Helium Core Developers
status: Proposed
---

# Helium Release Proposal September 2025

## Summary

This document defines the release that will be deployed on or before September 9th, 2025. As features are discussed in the community and developed by Helium Core Developers, this release document will be updated with context and explicit details on implementation.

Around the vote date, which is expected to kick off around September 1st, 2025, this release will be finalized and presented to the community for approval. Note that all features that are not code complete will be moved to a future release or removed prior to vote.

---

## Roadmap Features

1. Retire Pyth Sponsored Price Feeds for Minting Data Credits
2. Increase Distance to Asserted Allowance
3. Adjust Outdoor Coverage Template
---

### (1)

The protocol team plans to retire the pyth sponsored price feed in favor of the client-side pull-based pyth model.

#### Motivation

The current `mintDataCreditsV0` smart contract endpoint uses Pyth sponsored price feeds. This is an outdated way of accessing prices, and has since been replaced by a pull-based method where the user of the endpoint writes the most recent price in the same transaction as using the price. This is part of routine maintainance to make sure helium-program-library is adhering to most recent best-practice.

#### Implementation

The pull-based price updates are still `PriceUpdateV2` accounts, so minimal changes to the smart contracts are necessary. Instead of validating the solana account at a specific address, the contracts will instead validate the feed ID on the price update.

This change is backwards compatible -- existing clients will continue to function until the sponsored price feed is turned off. We intend to leave the sponsored price feed running until we can ensure all consumers have switched.

#### Alternatives Considered

Leaving the sponsored price feed as is; however that incurs a cost of 5 SOL per month.

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

Saves 5 SOL/month in protocol costs.

#### Drawbacks

Anyone with a user interface that mints data credits will need to update that user interface to use the new price update methodology. They will need to do so before the sponsored price feed is retired.

---

### (2) Increase Distance to Asserted Allowance

#### Motivation

Proof of coverage rewards in Mobile are affected by a Location Trust Score, which is affected by the distance between the asserted and inferred location of a hotspot. The inferred location is determined based on the type of Hotspot (indoor vs. outdoor) but uses GPS when available (outdoor) with fallbacks to a Skyhook-based WiFi location estimate, and finally the asserted location. These inferred locations are integrated over time to avoid outlier readings having too great of an effect on the inferred location. 

The allowed distance between the asserted and inferred location affects the Location Trust Score, which in turn is a multiplier on the PoC rewards the hotspot can receive. 

As part of Carrier Offload to be dynamically turned on or off based on the Location Trust Score, the core developers looked at the current fleet of deployed Hotspots and their distances and will be adjusting the distances where the Trust Score drops to 0.25 and 0, to be more lenient. 

For indoor Hotspots: 

| Current Distance | New Distance  | Score |
|------------------|---------------|-------|
| 0   - 200        |     0 - 300   |  1.0  |
| 201 - 300        |   301 - 400   |  0.25 |
| 301 -            |   401 -       |  0    |

For outdoor Hotspots

| Current Distance | New Distance  | Score |
|------------------|---------------|-------|
| 0   - 75         |     0 - 100   |  1.0  |
| 76 - 100         |   101 - 150   |  0.25 |
| 101 -            |   151 -       |  0   |


#### Implementation

This is a simple multiplier adjustment to the Mobile Oracles

#### Alternatives Considered

The indicated distances were arrived at to include 95% of all distances to asserted values for hotspots where the Location Trust Score was not currently 1.0. The remaining 5% of Hotspots had distances that far exceeded the maximum value and would be considered mis-asserted hotspots. 

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

This should have a positive impact on deployers since Skyhook drift will impact deployers less while allowing the dynamic offload enablement after carrier selection to be implemented without affecting correctly deployed hotspots.

#### Drawbacks

The increased allowance does make for less accuracy on verifying a hotspot location based on the inferred location, but carrier selection currently looks at the "general" location correctness of a hotspot instead of a more precise location. 


---

### (3) Adjust Outdoor Coverage Template

#### Motivation

As part of calculating Coverage Points for Hotspots, the Mobile Verifier uses a Coverage Template for each type of hotspot. The indoor Hotspots uses a simple single hex, whereas the outdoor Hotspot uses a wedge-shaped Coverage Template that covers 120 degrees with a certain distance. 

Overlapping Coverage Templates reduce the awarded points for Hotspots, which incentivizes deployers to spread Hotspots out. 

Actual outdoor Hotspot deployments and WiFi connectivity measurements show that the range of the outdoor Hotspot is not nearly as far as the current template seems to indicate. 

Outdoor hotspots have three signal strength ranges that each allocate a number of coverage points per hex. The core devs will be removing the lowest (LOW) signal strength wedge and reducing the medium (MED) distance by 30%. Indoor Hotspots will not be affected by this change.

The coverage points for LOW will be dropped completely, but the MED coverage points will stay the same even with a reduced set of MED hexes. This will result in about a 16.7% drop in coverage points for outdoor Hotspots, but will allow for better/closer placement of outdoor hotspots to create useful coverage. 

For outdoor Hotspots: 

| Signal Level | Current Points | New Points  | Current Distance | New Distance |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------|--------------|
| HIGH         |     16         |  16         |         ?        |       ?      |
| MED          |      8         |  8          |        100       |      70      |
| LOW          |      4         |  0          |         ?        |      N/A     |
| NONE         |      0         |  0          |        N/A       |      N/A     |



#### Implementation

This is a simple change to the coverage point allocation and the Coverage Object Server. Re-running all outdoor Hotspot coverage objects without losing seniority is the most complex part of the procedure but has been done before. 

#### Alternatives Considered

* Leave the MED signal strength range unchanged, but it does not reflect actual observed coverage distance. 
* Reducing the coverage points for MED signal strength by a corresponding 30% was evaluated but considered to be too large of a drop in PoC rewards for the coverage provided by an outdoor Hotspot.

#### Impact and Stakeholder Impact

This change would reduce the Coverage Points of all outdoor hotspots by about 17%, which means a similar percentage of PoC rewards would get shifted towards indoor hotspots right after deployment of this change. 

This reflects the current priority of indoor Hotspots for Carrier Offload, but will also adjust back towards the current balance as more outdoor Hotspots are deployed. 

#### Drawbacks

None




-------
