---
release-date: 2025-04-09
vote-date: 2025-03-27
authors:
  - Helium Core Developers
status: Proposed
---

# Helium Release Proposal April 2025

## Summary

This document defines the release that will be deployed on or before April 9, 2025. As features are discussed in the community and developed by Helium Core Developers, this release document will be updated with context and explicit details on implementation.

Around the vote date, that's expected to kick off at March 27, 2025, this release will be finalized and presented to the community for approval. Note that all features that are not code complete will be moved to a future release or removed prior to vote.

---

## Roadmap Features

1. HIP-103 Urban Area Multiplier Adjustment
2. Upgrade to Anchor 31 and Solana 2+
3. Add Data Transfer and Proof-of-Coverage ban support to Mobile oracles
4. Decrease IoT Hotspot Onboarding and Assertion Costs

---

### (1) HIP-103 Urban Area Multiplier Adjustment

Reduce the PoC reward multipler for [HIP 103][hip-103] `C*` areas to `0.03`, to further incentivize deployements in high footfall, urban areas with businesses.


#### Motivation

The current Helium Mobile Proof of Coverage (PoC) system rewards Hotspots based on their deployment location as well as data transfer. The PoC rewards in the United States are adjusted using [HIP 103][hip-103] to reward hotspots in certain areas more than others.

The current allocation of multipliers allows low footfall (C) areas to earn PoC with a multiplier between `0.03` and `0.4` depending on the other two (urban, land type) layers. Given the number of residential deployments this is evidently too high.

Reducing all `C*` areas to multiplier `0.03` will remove some, but not all, of the PoC incentive for Hotspotsin those areas, moving more rewards to more desirable areas in the US.

#### Implementation

The implementation involves a simple change in the Mobile Verifier Oracle to adjust multipliers for the identified `C*` hex areas.

#### Alternatives Considered

* No Change
  - This will continue the existing rollout of Hotspots in approximately the same ratio as exist today, unnecessarily increasing and rewarding the number of hotspots providing little to no utility to the network
* Multiplier `0`
  - This would be a more drastic change to the network but is an option that may be considered once the effects of this proposal are observed.

#### Impact

* Incentivizes Hotspots to move to higher reward locations
* Shifts PoC rewards to hotspots in better locations

#### Drawbacks

* Fewer Hotspots in urban areas will reduce offload options
  - This should be counteracted by the implementation details of [HIP 140][hip-140] which indicates that carrier selection for a hotspot in any location will set the PoC multiplier back to `1`

---

[hip-103]: https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0103-oracle-hex-boosting.md
[hip-140]:  https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0140-adjust-service-provider-boost-qualifiers.md


### (2) Upgrade to Anchor 31 and Solana 2+

Upgrade smart contracts to to Anchor 31 and Solana 2+ as part of regular maintenance. These are the latest versions
for the Solana ecosystem.


#### Motivation

Helium contracts are currently on Anchor 28 and Solana 1.16. These versions are outdated and need to be upgraded. The newest
versions include increases to performance and ergonomics of the sdks.

#### Implementation

The implementation involves upgrading the smart contracts to the latest versions of Anchor and Solana, and dealing with any and all issues that arise from this upgrade. 

#### Alternatives Considered

None, we must do this at some point.

#### Impact

The largest change from Anchor 28 to 31 are breaking changes to the on-chain IDL. Because there is only one address with the IDL, this creates an issue where old anchor 28 clients fail to parse the new IDL.

To mitigate this change, we are upgrading the RPC endpoint that all user-facing applications (wallet apps, etc) interact with to return the old IDLs when they detect an old client. We recommend that everyone providing third party tools to the network upgrade their typescript packages to 0.10.0 or later.

#### Drawbacks

None, other than the IDL issues stated above.


### (3) Add Data Transfer and Proof-of-Coverage ban support to Mobile oracles

Add support for trusted keys to ban a Hotspot from earning Data Transfer rewards, Proof-of-Coverage rewards, or both.

#### Motivation

When a Hotspot has been found gaming either Data Transfer, PoC, or both, this will allow a trusted key to send a message to the Mobile oracles that will stop the Hotspot from earning rewards.  The ban can have an expiration date or be permanent and will contain the reason for the ban.

#### Implementation

A new Protobuf containing a timestamp, public key of the Hotspot, expiration timestamp, type of ban, reason, and a message will be created.  If the new Protobuf is verified, the mobile-packet-verifier will be updated to enforce Hotspots not earning rewards for Data Transfer and the mobile-verifier will be updated to enforce not earning rewards for PoC. A similar Protobuf will be created to allow the Hotspot to be unbanned.

#### Impact

* Banned Hotspots and the reason why will become public data and accessible via the mobile-oracle s3 buckets

---

### (4) Decrease IoT Hotspot Onboarding and Assertion Costs

Reduce the onboarding and assertion cost for IoT Full-Hotspots in order to decrease the friction associated with relocating Hotspots, or for self-onboarding Hotspots in situations where maker funds are unavailable. This proposal is presented by the IoT Working Group and through merging, is adopted by the core developers.

#### Motivation

The combined onboarding and assertion cost for IoT Hotspots had remained relatively consistent at $50 ($40 onboard, $10 assert) since the inception of the network. [HIP 69][hip-69] and [HIP 91][hip-91] temporarily decreased the assertion fee to $5, while the onboarding fee remained fixed.

Changing the fees now unburdens deployers seeking to deploy new coverage using Hotspots from defunct Hotspot manufacturers, or are seeking to redeploy Hotspots in new locations. Previous discussions on this topic sought to optimize a fee balance between user behavior and on-chain economics. The change as defined here, takes a simpler approach and aligns the IoT Hotspot fees with current community sentiment as well as the comparative fees of the Mobile Network (at $20 onboard for Indoor Hotspots, $30 for Outdoor Hotspots).

#### Implementation

The update will change the Onboarding and Assertion cost without introducing additional logic.  
IoT Full-Hotspot Onboarding is set to $10.00, paid in DC.  
IoT Full-Hotspot Assertion is set to $1.00, paid in DC.

Data-Only IoT Hotspot onboarding and assertion costs remain at $0.50 and $0.50, respectively.

Relevant documentation will be updated to reflect this change.

Hotspot makers will be notified of the change.

#### Alternatives Considered

* No Change
  - Onboarding continues to occur at the current pricing. The existing pricing could continue, but remains a friction point for IoT operators seeking to provide coverage.
* Buffered earnings
  - The Working Group discussed drastically lower fees, but paired with lockups of earned HNT. This would seek to curb gaming while offering a low barrier to entry. The Working Group may reconsider this path, but currently favors the method of reducing pricing.
* Halving-based reduction
  - Retroactively binding the fees to halvings would effectively lower the cost, but adds additional complexity to a change that is easily handled by a static update. Halvings are not necessarily correlated to the expected value of an onboard.
* $0 Assert
  - The Mobile network does not charge for location assertion. The Working Group discussed also zeroing this fee, but a $1 assert maintains existing mechanics and achieves the goal of lowering friction.

#### Impact

* Decreased friction for existing Hotspot operators to update Hotspot location.
* Decreased financial overhead on Hotspot retail cost.
* Lower cost for Makers continually funding DC Balances.
* Improved first-time user experience for users onboarding a Hotspot from a defunct maker.

#### Drawbacks

Certain Hotspot makers have prepaid the onboarding fee of their Hotspots. This change will effectively extend their prepaid escrow, possibly beyond the allotment of Hotspots they have manufactured. Maker balances are available in a [Dune Dashboard][dune-maker-dashboard]

[hip-69]: https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0069-reassertion-fee-reduction.md
[hip-91]: https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0091-data-driven-extension-reduced-iot-assertion-cost.md
[dune-maker-dashboard]: https://dune.com/helium-foundation/helium-makers

---